Hello everybody. Today I'd like to talk to you about the impact I hope to have
on society. This is something very important and personal to me, and I'm really
happy to be getting a chance to talk about it today. Let's hope I do it justice.

Anyways, let's get right into it. I'd like to begin by addressing the elephant
in the room:

*  NEXT SLIDE  *

As some of you might know, I am a math major. Not a math-CS major, not a
math-physics major --- just a plain, honest-to-goodness math major. In
particular, my interests lie in _pure_ math, not applied math. Generally
speaking, I'm not very interested in real-world problems. This raises a
question: how, then, can I hope hope to have an impact on society, if pure math
is "never of any use to anybody?"

* SLIGHT PAUSE *
*  NEXT SLIDE  *

Well, I just...don't think it's true that pure math has no use. If that were teh
case, nobody would study it. The quote presents a false dichotomy: namely, that
in order to have societal utility, a thing has to have real-world applications.
But there are plenty of counterexamples here. For instance, it's hard to suggest
that Literature, Music, or the Arts have any "real-world applications," and yet
we don't think of them as "useless," because they contribute positively to the
human experience. I believe math has the potential to do the same.

*  NEXT SLIDE  *

At its best, it affords many things that people love. Cool ideas to puzzle over,
different ways of seeing the world, and involvement in a vibrant community. The
issue is that most people never get a chance to interact with math in this way.

*  NEXT SLIDE  *

Access to "higher math" is gated in many subtle ways by facets of class and
privilege. There are many problems here, but I'll just focus on two big ones:
the accessibility of good materials, and the prevalence of "traumatic"
experiences in math education.

  + The first is fairly self-explanatory: although resources like KhanAcademy,
    Wikipedia, and 3Blue1Brown are making free, high-quality math information
    more accessible day by day, there's still a long way to go before they can
    achieve parity with a well-taught brick-and-mortar class. And as-of-yet,
    outreach leaves something to be desired as well. This systematically
    disadvantages students who lack exposure to high-quality classroom
    environments, etc.

  + Second, for many people, math classes are traumatic. I'm always shocked at
    how consistently people say things like "I was always terrible at math" when
    I tell them what I study. This is a horrifying pathology of our education
    system: I can think of no other subject that, upon just being _mentioned_
    causes people such intense feelings of panic and shame.

    In my personal experience, this has a lot to do with how classes and
    teachers define success, and relate those ideas to their students.

    I don't usually talk about this, but in high school, math was actually my
    worst subject (by _far_). I particularly remember a PreCalc test where,
    despite studying for _hours_ and _hours_, I scored just a 54%. When I got my
    exam back, I went to my teacher's office after school and asked her for
    help. I told her I thought I understood things in class, but just couldn't
    perform on our tests. Eventually, she got impatient and snapped at me,
    saying this

*  NEXT SLIDE  *

    "Honestly Forest, I think your biggest problem is that you're just not as
    smart as you think you are. And the sooner you learn to accept that, and
    stop trying to change it, the better for all of us."

*  NEXT SLIDE  *

    She then recommended that I be dropped from the Honors program.

    Hearing that as a student was absolutely devestating. I remember just how
    _factual_ it felt. It wasn't personal --- I simply wasn't good at math. The
    tests showed that. My teacher, who had seen hundreds of students before me,
    told me that. How could I possibly know better than she did? Why should I
    believe in myself over her?

  + I'm going to gloss over a lot details that aren't directly relevant for my
    talk, but the gist is that I was given one last chance, and eventually
    improved. But to this day, I'm shocked by how easy it would have been for
    things to go differently. For example, as an asian-american male, I didn't
    have to fight against the additional barrier of implicit racial stereotypes.
    In fact, they actuall worked in my favor here, asserting that I really
    _should_ be be good at math. What if I were not from such a privileged
    group? What if I hadn't been _lucky_?

    How many potentially excited students does our field lose each year because
    of things like this? It's hard to say for sure. But one need only glance at
    demographic information for mathematicians at the undergraduate, graduate,
    and postdoctoral levels to see that they become increasingly skewed towards
    white and asian men at every step.

  + So: where do we go from here?

*  NEXT SLIDE  *

  + As I've said before, I feel that I was lucky in many, many ways, and that
    this is what allowed me to start moving forward from these events.

    This upsets me. I hate the idea of serendipity playing such a large role in
    who gets a chance to _learn_ --- in who gets to see the concepts that make
    them want to know more. This is what I want to change. Leaving my PreCalc
    class, I knew two things with certainty:

    (1) I want to become an educator. I want to be able to show people _why_
        they should be excited about math. I want people to feel the novelty of
        pulling new perspective from it. I want to help them pursue the ideas
        that bring them joy.

    (2) In that role, I _will_ be better. I will work hard to make materials
        more widely accessible to _everybody_, independent of race, gender,
        sexuality, and anything else. And I will never treat a struggling
        student with disdain.

*  NEXT SLIDE  *

  + Of course, things are easier said than done. These are hugely complex
    issues, often subject to powerful societal undercurrents that require
    supra-institutional action to combat. But locally speaking, teachers can
    still make a big difference. They have one of the few jobs that offers an
    opportunity to affect not just _what_ people think, but _how_. This is an
    awesome power.

  + Lest this remain an abstract call to action, I'd like to remind all of you
    that calling someone a "teacher" does not need to mean it is their
    _occupation_ to teach. As Harvey Mudd students, we have knowledge of
    important technical subjects that the majority of people will never get an
    opportunity to engage with. But that can be changed. By carrying this
    knowledge, each of us has an opportunity to try and disseminate it --- or at
    the very least, tell people that it exists.

*  NEXT SLIDE  *

I'll leave you with one last quote today:

  "If you want to build a ship, don't drum up the men to gather wood, divide the
  work, and give orders. Instead, teach them to yearn for the vast and endless
  sea."

Many of us will find ourselves oneday in a position that offers a chance for
edification. Whatever level it is --- grading, TAing, even lecturing --- we
should remember that there's always two facets to teaching: (1) showing students
how to build a boat, and (2) giving them the guts to go to sea.

Don't forget the second.
